Breadcrumb
Home
Methodology and quality
ESMS metadata
Hourly earnings of male and female employees
Hourly earnings of male and female employees
1. Contact
1.1. Contact organisation
Statistics Estonia
1.2. Contact organisation unit
Population and Social Statistics Department
1.3. Contact name
Sigrid Saagpakk
1.4. Contact person function
Analyst
1.5. Contact mail address
51 Tatari Str, 10134 Tallinn, Estonia
1.6. Contact email address
sigrid.saagpakk
[at]
stat.ee
1.7. Contact phone number
+372 625 9298
2. Metadata update
2.1. Metadata last certified
03/10/2024
2.2. Metadata last update
03/10/2024
3. Statistical presentation
3.1. Data description
Average gross hourly earnings of male and female employees by major group of occupation, economic activity, level of education, age group, length of service and type of employment contract
Deciles and median of average gross monthly and hourly earnings of male and female employees by major group of occupation and economic activity
3.2. Classification system
Estonian Classification of Economic Activities (EMTAK 2008) based on NACE Rev. 2
Classification of Estonian administrative units and settlements (EHAK)
National Standard Classification of Education (ISCED 2011)
International Standard Classification of Occupations (ISCO 08)
3.3. Sector coverage
Economically active units – enterprises, institutions and organisations (excl. economic units without employees)
3.4. Statistical concepts and definitions
Average gross hourly earnings in October – time-rate and piece-rate payments, additional remuneration for overtime work, night work and holiday work, for work in difficult and unhealthy conditions, monthly bonus, regular additional remuneration for qualifications, language and length of service, etc. divided by the hours worked.
Deciles – divide the employees into ten equal groups. The first decile shows the value of earnings of which 10% employees earn less and 90% earn more. The fifth decile is at the same time the median, of which half of employees earn higher and half earn lower earnings.
Gross earnings for worked time in October – time-rate and piece-rate payments; additional remuneration for overtime work, night work and holiday work, for work in difficult and unhealthy conditions, monthly bonus, regular additional remuneration for qualifications, language and length of service, etc.
Quarterly and annual bonuses, Christmas allowances and other irregular bonuses and allowances; payments in kind; payments to employees leaving the enterprise and in the case of sick leave; one-time allowances in the case of a jubilee, birth and death, etc. are excluded.
Hours worked in October – hours actually worked by full-time and part-time employees, incl. time spent on tasks such as work preparation, repairing and cleaning equipment and devices, completing job tasks and reports; time spent at the place of work but not worked, e.g. machine stoppages, tea and coffee breaks, and overtime hours.
Part-time employee – an employee who has a part-time working day, week or month; an employee who works part-time on the employer’s initiative.
3.5. Statistical unit
Employee
3.6. Statistical population
Economically active units – enterprises, institutions and organisations (excl. economic units without employees)
FRAME
List of economically active units (excl. economic units without employees).
The list is generated from the Business Register for Statistical Purposes.
3.7. Reference area
Estonia as a whole – by major groups of economic activity (marked with letters in EMTAK)
Counties – gross hourly earnings of male and female employees and median by major group of occupation
3.8. Time coverage
2005–…
3.9. Base period
Not applicable
4. Unit of measure
euro
5. Reference period
Year
Month
6. Institutional mandate
6.1. Legal acts and other agreements
DIRECTLY APPLICABLE LEGAL ACTS
Commission Regulation (EC) No 1916/2000 of 8 September 2000 on implementing Council Regulation (EC) No 530/1999 concerning structural statistics on earnings and on labour costs as regards the definition and transmission of information on structure of earnings
Commission Regulation (EC) No 698/2006 of 5 May 2006 implementing Council Regulation (EC) No 530/1999 as regards quality evaluation of structural statistics on labour costs and earnings
Commission Regulation (EC) No 1738/2005 of 21 October 2005 amending Regulation (EC) No 1916/2000 as regards the definition and transmission of information on the structure of earnings
Council Regulation (EC) No 530/1999 of 9 March 1999 concerning structural statistics on earnings and on labour costs
OTHER LEGAL ACTS
Not available
OTHER AGREEMENTS
Not available
7. Confidentiality
7.1. Confidentiality - policy
The dissemination of data collected for the purpose of producing official statistics is guided by the requirements provided for in § 34 and § 35 of the Official Statistics Act.
7.2. Confidentiality - data treatment
The treatment of confidential data is regulated by the Procedure for Protection of Data Collected and Processed by Statistics Estonia: http://www.stat.ee/66485.
8. Release policy
8.1. Release calendar
Notifications about the dissemination of statistics are published in the release calendar, which is available on the website. Every year on 1 October, the release times of the statistical database, news releases, main indicators by IMF SDDS and publications for the following year are announced in the release calendar (in the case of publications – the release month).
8.2. Release calendar access
http://www.stat.ee/release-calendar
8.3. User access
All users have been granted equal access to official statistics: dissemination dates of official statistics are announced in advance and no user category (incl. Eurostat, state authorities and mass media) is provided access to official statistics before other users. Official statistics are first published in the statistical database. If there is also a news release, it is published simultaneously with data in the statistical database. Official statistics are available on the website at 8:00 a.m. on the date announced in the release calendar.
9. Frequency of dissemination
Over four years
10. Accessibility and clarity
10.1. News release
Not published
10.2. Publications
Not published
10.3. Online database
Data are published under the subject area “Economy / Wages and salaries and labour costs” in the statistical database at https://andmed.stat.ee/en/stat.
10.4. Microdata access
The dissemination of data collected for the purpose of producing official statistics is guided by the requirements provided for in § 33, § 34, § 35, § 36, § 38 of the Official Statistics Act. Access to microdata and anonymisation of microdata are regulated by Statistics Estonia’s
procedure for dissemination of confidential data for scientific purposes
.
10.5. Other
Data serve as input for statistical activity 50101 “Regional development” and statistical activity 21108 “Gender Pay Gap”.
10.6. Documentation on methodology
Council Regulation (EC) No 530/1999 of 9 March 1999 concerning structural statistics on earnings and on labour costs
Commission Regulation (EC) No 1916/2000 of 8 September 2000 on implementing Council Regulation (EC) No 530/1999 concerning structural statistics on earnings and on labour costs as regards the definition and transmission of information on structure of earnings
Commission Regulation (EC) No 1738/2005 of 21 October 2005 amending Regulation (EC) No 1916/2000 as regards the definition and transmission of information on the structure of earnings
Commission Regulation (EC) No 698/2006 of 5 May 2006 implementing Council Regulation (EC) No 530/1999 as regards quality evaluation of structural statistics on labour costs and earnings
10.7. Quality documentation
Quality Report submitted to Eurostat.
Data on the population, sample and respondents and error estimates are published in the Statistical Database.
11. Quality management
11.1. Quality assurance
To assure the quality of processes and products, Statistics Estonia applies the EFQM Excellence Model, the European Statistics Code of Practice and the Quality Assurance Framework of the European Statistical System (ESS QAF). Statistics Estonia is also guided by the requirements in § 7. “Principles and quality criteria of producing official statistics” of the Official Statistics Act.
11.2. Quality assessment
Statistics Estonia performs all statistical activities according to an international model (Generic Statistical Business Process Model – GSBPM). According to the GSBPM, the final phase of statistical activities is overall evaluation using information gathered in each phase or sub-process; this information can take many forms, including feedback from users, process metadata, system metrics and suggestions from employees. This information is used to prepare the evaluation report which outlines all the quality problems related to the specific statistical activity and serves as input for improvement actions.
12. Relevance
12.1. User needs
Ministry of Social Affairs
12.2. User satisfaction
Since 1996, Statistics Estonia has conducted reputation and user satisfaction surveys.
All results are available on the website at http://www.stat.ee/user-surveys.
12.3. Completeness
In compliance with the rules (regulations)
13. Accuracy and reliability
13.1. Overall accuracy
The type of survey and the data collection methods ensure sufficient coverage and timeliness.
13.2. Sampling error
The error due to probability sampling is estimated and the sampling errors are published in the Statistical Database.
13.3. Non-sampling error
Eurostat and the national statistical institutes try to reduce non-sampling errors through continuous methodological improvements and survey process improvements.
14. Timeliness and punctuality
14.1. Timeliness
Preliminary data are published at the latest within 18 months of the end of the reference period (T + 18 months).
14.2. Punctuality
The data have been published at the time announced in the release calender.
15. Coherence and comparability
15.1. Comparability - geographical
The definitions and classifications used in Estonia comply with international definitions and classifications, ensuring international comparability of results.
15.2. Comparability - over time
The data are comparable over time.
15.3. Coherence - cross domain
Statistics on earnings are closely related to other statistics in this field. However, coherence problems (differences in coverage, definitions and/or methodology) should be taken into account when comparing data related to the same variables, but obtained from other sources (statistical activity 21101 “Wages and salaries”).
15.4. Coherence - internal
The outputs of the statistical activity are coherent. Higher-level aggregations are derived from detailed data according to pre-defined procedures.
16. Cost and burden
17. Data revision
17.1. Data revision - policy
The data revision policy and notification of corrections are described in the dissemination policy of Statistics Estonia at http://www.stat.ee/dissemination-policy.
17.2. Data revision - practice
The published data may be revised if the methodology is modified, errors are discovered, new or better data become available.
18. Statistical processing
18.1. Source data
SURVEY DATA
Total population is 80,900 objects. The sample includes 10,000 objects.
For enterprises, institutions and non-profit associations with less than 150 employees, stratified simple random sampling by 2-digit code of economic activity and by size group of enterprise is used. All enterprises and institutions with 150 and more employees are surveyed, but simple random sample of employees is used.
ADMINISTRATIVE DATA
Data from the Estonian Tax and Customs Board employment register are used.
DATA FROM OTHER STATISTICAL ACTIVITIES
Not used
18.2. Frequency of data collection
Over four years
18.3. Data collection
Data are collected and the submission of questionnaires is monitored through eSTAT (the web channel for electronic data submission). The questionnaires have been designed for independent completion in eSTAT and include instructions and controls. The questionnaires and information about data submission are available on Statistics Estonia’s website at https://www.stat.ee/en/submit-data/about-data-submission/enterprise-surveys.
Data are collected with the official statistics questionnaire “Structure of earnings survey”.
18.4. Data validation
Arithmetic and qualitative checks are used in the validation process, including checking that the population coverage and response rates are as required, comparison with the data of previous periods, other surveys and with administrative data sources.
18.5. Data compilation
In the case of missing or unreliable data, estimate imputation based on established regulations will be used.
Variables and statistical units which were not collected but which are necessary for producing the output are calculated. New variables are calculated by applying arithmetic conversion to already existing variables. This may be done repeatedly, the derived variable may, in turn, be based on previously derived new variables.
For statistical units weights are calculated, which are used to expand the data of the sample survey to the total population. The expansion factor is two-staged. First, the expansion factor is found for surveyed units and then for each employee.
Microdata are aggregated to the level necessary for analysis. This includes aggregating the data according to the classification, and calculating various statistical measures, e.g. average, median, dispersion, etc.
The collected data are converted into statistical output. This includes calculating additional indicators.
18.6. Adjustment
Employee's paid hours and earnings, which are affected by unpaid absence, are adjusted to obtain paid hours and earnings for a full month.
19. Comments
Until 2015, the name of the statistical activity was “Earnings (hourly earnings of male and female employees)”.
